plugin: Introduce protocol and terraform-plugin-mux documentation (#2181)
hashicorp/terraform-website: content/plugin/mux/combining-protocol-version-5-providers.mdx

---
page_title: 'Plugin Development - Combining Protocol Version 5 Providers'
description: >-
  Use the tf5muxserver package in terraform-plugin-mux to combine protocol version 5 providers.
---

# Combining Protocol Version 5 Providers

The [`tf5muxserver`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-mux/tf5muxserver) package enables combining any number of [protocol version 5 provider servers](../how-terraform-works#protocol-version-5) into a single server.

Use this package to:

* Support multiple development teams across separate codebases.

> * Support multiple provider SDK implementations, including but not limited to, combining [terraform-plugin-sdk/v2](../sdkv2/sdkv2-intro) and [terraform-plugin-framework](../framework) after using [tf6to5server](./translating-protocol-version-6-to-5).

Reviewer: I'm wondering if the detail about how you have to translate them first is a detail we don't need to mention here. Thoughts?

```suggestion
* Support multiple provider SDK implementations, including but not limited to, combining providres built with the [terraform-plugin-sdk/v2](../sdkv2/sdkv2-intro) and the [terraform-plugin-framework](../framework).
```

## Compatibility

Protocol version 5 provider servers are compatible with Terraform CLI 0.12 and later.

The following provider server implementations are supported:

> * [terraform-plugin-sdk/v2](../sdkv2/sdkv2-intro): Develop Terraform Providers with a higher level SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [terraform-plugin-sdk/v2](../sdkv2/sdkv2-intro): Develop Terraform providers with a higher-level SDK.
```

> * [terraform-plugin-go tf5server](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-go/tfprotov5/tf5server): Develop advanced use case Terraform Providers with a lower level SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [terraform-plugin-go tf5server](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-go/tfprotov5/tf5server): Develop Terraform providers for advanced use cases with a lower-level SDK.
```

* [tf6to5server](./translating-protocol-version-6-to-5): Translate protocol version 6 providers into protocol version 5.

## Requirements

> Combined provider servers have the following requirements:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be combined, provider servers must meet the following requirements:
```

> * All provider schemas must match
> * All provider meta schemas must match
> * Only one provider may implement each resource and data source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All provider schemas must match.
* All provider meta schemas must match.
* Only one provider may implement each resource and data source.
```

> If publishing to the [Terraform Registry](/registry), the [Terraform Registry manifest file](https://www.terraform.io/registry/providers/publishing#terraform-registry-manifest-file) should have `metadata.protocol_versions` set to `["5.0"]`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If publishing to the [Terraform Registry](/registry), set `metadata.protocol_versions` to `["5.0"]` in the [Terraform Registry manifest file](https://www.terraform.io/registry/providers/publishing#terraform-registry-manifest-file).
```

## Code Implementation

> Use the [`tf5muxserver.NewMuxServer()`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-mux/tf5muxserver#NewMuxServer) function to create a combined provider server. For most providers, implement this in the provider `main()` function of the root directory `main.go` file or within a shared internal package to enable [testing for the combined provider](#testing-implementation). You can use [`tf5server.WithManagedDebug()`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-go/tfprotov5/tf5server#WithManagedDebug) to enable debugger support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [`tf5muxserver.NewMuxServer()`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-mux/tf5muxserver#NewMuxServer) function to create a combined provider server. Most providers implement this method in the provider `main()` function of the root directory `main.go` file or within a shared internal package to enable [testing for the combined provider](#testing-implementation). You can use [`tf5server.WithManagedDebug()`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-go/tfprotov5/tf5server#WithManagedDebug) to enable debugger support.
```

> The following example implements `tf5muxserver.NewMuxServer()` in a  `main()` function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example implements `tf5muxserver.NewMuxServer()` in a  `main()` function.
```

```go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"flag"
	"log"

	"github.com/example/terraform-provider-example/internal/provider1"
	"github.com/example/terraform-provider-example/internal/provider2"
	"github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-go/tfprotov5"
	"github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-go/tfprotov5/tf5server"
	"github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-mux/tf5muxserver"
)

var (
	// Version can be updated by goreleaser on release
	version string = "dev"
)

func main() {
	debugFlag := flag.Bool("debug", false, "Start provider in debug mode.")
	flag.Parse()

	ctx := context.Background()
	providers := []func() tfprotov5.ProviderServer{
		// Example terraform-plugin-sdk/v2 providers
		provider1.New(version)().GRPCProvider,
		provider2.New(version)().GRPCProvider,
	}

	muxServer, err := tf5muxserver.NewMuxServer(ctx, providers...)

	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}

	var serveOpts []tf5server.ServeOpt

	if *debugFlag {
		serveOpts = append(serveOpts, tf5server.WithManagedDebug())
	}

> 	err = tf5server.Serve("registry.terraform.io/example/example", muxServer.ProviderServer, serveOpts...)

Reviewer: Want to do a break here so there's no scroll bar on the code block
```suggestion
	err = tf5server.Serve("registry.terraform.io/example/example", muxServer.ProviderServer,
	 serveOpts...)
```

Author: 80 characters works. I'll pull in the latest changes in a second then use a code editor to ensure these match that standard and push up the changes.

	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
}
```

## Testing Implementation

> You can test individual providers using the same [acceptance tests](../sdkv2/testing/acceptance-tests) as before. To test the combined provider, use the acceptance testing framework available in [terraform-provider-sdk/v2/helper/resource](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-sdk/v2/helper/resource) by setting the [`ProtoV5ProviderFactories` field of `TestCase`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-sdk/v2/helper/resource#TestCase.ProtoV5ProviderFactories):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can test individual providers using the same [acceptance tests](../sdkv2/testing/acceptance-tests) as before. Set the [`ProtoV5ProviderFactories`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-sdk/v2/helper/resource#TestCase.ProtoV5ProviderFactories field) of `TestCase` to use the acceptance testing framework available in [terraform-provider-sdk/v2/helper/resource](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/hashicorp/terraform-plugin-sdk/v2/helper/resource). 

The following example uses the acceptance testing framework to create a test for two providers.
```
